The backlash began with just a photo.
Here at a rest stop off Route 95 in
Darian, Connecticut, between a Subway,
Dunkin Donuts, and Sparrow sits a
McDonald's. In 2023, a traveler passing
through was astonished by its prices.
Instead of reaching for their wallet,
they pulled out their phone to capture
the absurdity. A Big Mac meal running
nearly $18.
The picture was posted on Twitter and
accompanied by a question, and the
response was overwhelming. The meal and
its outlandish price tag went viral. It
sparked conversation across social
media. It made national news. It got so
big that even McDonald's itself got
involved, releasing a statement
accompanied by a handy graphic aimed to
bust some myths about just how expensive
McDonald's had become over the past few
years. What gave this story such staying
power was that it felt like the perfect
example of a phenomena that was bigger
than the Northeast and bigger than
McDonald's, but instead one impacting
all Americans at all fast and fast
casual food spots. That these cheap and
convenient dining options were just no
longer cheap. An $18 burger meal proved
that point anecdotally, but some further
research proved as much too. In the past
decade, overall food prices were
trending higher than the overall
consumer price index. And then prices
for food away from home have trended yet
higher again than overall food prices.
Within the category of food away from
home, more research showed price growth
at limited service restaurants or fast
and fast casual was outpacing sit-down
restaurants. Fast food wasn't just
reflecting broader rising costs for the
American consumer. It was leading the
charge. Now, accompanying the general
outrage over an $18 Big Mac meal were
the explanations as to how we got here.
Often led by industry insiders or the
industry itself, the explanations cited
things simply out of fast foods control.
Labor, for instance, had become more
expensive after CO. California had
passed a bill that was going to hike
minimum wage for fast food workers to
$20 an hour. Retail ground beef prices
had soared across the decade, too, while
supplies like paper wrapping, cups, and
packaging shot upward as well. With
trade wars, tariffs, stimulus checks,
and increasing minimum wages, fast food
chains were forced to get more expensive
and hand these prices off to the
customer. Or at least that's what they'd
like their customer base to believe.
What's lost in this broadly true but
incomplete explanation is the fact that
pricing is not just a reflection of
strictly costs and constraints, but
broader business strategy. Fast food is
not just getting more expensive because
of factors beyond the industry's
control. It's getting more expensive
because the business of fast food is
changing on the fly. Compare these two
burger joints on either side of I5 in
Burbank, California. One representing
the cutting edge of fast foods change,
[music] the other an industry outlier
that simply refuses to change. These two
storefronts offer a very similar product
at a very similar price. The Double
Double at In-N-Out Burger cost $6.10 and
the Big Mac at McDonald's at $649.
Both offering a conceptually analogous
item sold at about the same price is
largely where the similarities between
these two businesses end. Their business
strategies and operations in fact are so
different that In-N-Out wants you to buy
a Double Double Burger, while
McDonald's, on the other hand, actively
hopes you don't. While a bit cheaper on
average, the consumer is going to find
the Double Double an objectively better
product. Personal preference aside, the
Double Double is made up of ingredients
that have never been frozen. The meat
was processed by In-N-Out at one of
these two locations that are both within
a day's drive, while ingredients like
buns have been contracted out to the
same company since the [music] 1950s,
ensuring freshness and consistent
quality. That superior consistency and
quality is then carried through the
process of preparing those ingredients
and interacting with the customer making
the order. as each location is laid out
in an almost identical manner while
staff is trained and expected to deliver
a highly standardized product with a
cheery welcoming attitude. Whether by
comparative Google reviews between
Burbank locations or annual rankings for
customer satisfaction, In-N-Out is going
to beat McDonald's and it has to as it's
core to the company's strategy. This
In-N-Out [music] and every In-N-Out has
a lot of staff to pay. Whereas
McDonald's can run a slow shift with 5
to 10 employees, an In-N-Out will be
staffed with 10 to 15, and during the
lunch and dinner rushes, this number can
regularly balloon to 25. And not only
are there more people to pay, but
they're getting paid better as this
Burbank location starts its staff at $22
an hour with benefits and quick
positional and pay advancement
opportunities. With industryleading pay
and staffing and a comparatively cheap
product, the chain saves through
vertical integration. The company owns
the locations rather than renting them.
It operates its own meat processing and
trucking. And it sources products from
Pink Lemonade to paperware from the same
singular companies it has for decades.
But those savings aside, to profit off a
menu built around five and $6 burgers,
this location needs to sell a lot.
Because of a combination of quality and
consistency, an In-N-Out customer will
gladly brave a 20-minute drive-through
wait or stand in line for a few minutes
without the privilege of ordering ahead
or through an app. And because of this
loyalty to the product, an average
location does annual revenue of about $6
million a year. McDonald's, on the other
hand, averages about $4 million per
location a year. More impressive still,
In-N-Out pulls in 33% more business in
15% less time as its locations are open
for an average of 14 and 1/2 hours a day
compared to McDonald's's 17.
Familyowned, consistent, [music]
clean, simple, In-N-Out feels like what
fast food was like at its founding in
the '50s. But that's exactly why it's so
singular, so unique from the rest, and
so small. In its home state of
California, there are only 289 locations
compared to over 1,200 McDonald's within
the state. Just within this narrow
cross-section of Burbank, McDonald's
outnumbers In-N-Out 4 to one. [music]
In-N-Out is tiny in the grand scheme of
things. And in every trend of fast food,
it's an outlier. But the very fact that
it competes with and in many cases out
competes the larger fast food chains on
price while providing equal to better
quality shows that pricing is a tool, a
choice, an extension of strategy rather
than something simply forced upon the
industry. With 14,000 locations in just
the US, but just 5% of those locations
operated by the publicly traded company,
McDonald's as a corporation just can't
maximize consistency or quality of
products like In-N-Out. [music]
nor are they really incentivized to. You
see, the transformation that shot prices
through the roof began with a pivot,
making breakfast available all day. In
the 2010s, as year-over-year sales
across US locations were either
stagnating or falling, McDonald's under
new leadership looked to counter the
rise of fast casual restaurants
encroaching on their territory. CEO
Steve Easterbrook wanted McDonald's to
be the modern, progressive burger
company. That meant better quality
chicken, fresher beef, more datadriven
decisions, and a more capable mobile
app. The first major move was that
allday breakfast extension. Customers
had always clamored for this. Surveys
called for it, but leadership
understandably had reservations. Would
it be worth the kitchen remodels and
complications? Would the move
cannibalize lunch and dinner product
performance? Rather than go off a hunch,
they modeled it, leaning on a tech
partnership with applied predictive
technologies, then rolling out a
regional trial and collecting receipt
data with the help of the NPD group. The
study showed that allday breakfast would
bring customers they had lost back while
also adding to overall receipt totals as
midday diners were showing a tendency to
toss a breakfast item like a McMuffin or
hash brown on their order. Confident
enough to push the franchise to remodel
their kitchens and take on all day
breakfast, the company began a major
turnaround and they attributed to not
just a host of breakfast items, but the
increasing importance of big tech and
big data in the company's operations. It
[music] was just the start.
Consider these three transactions. One
buying a Big Mac meal in Aztec, New
Mexico. One buying a Big Mac meal in
Newcastle, Colorado. And one buying the
same product again, this time in
Burbank, California. The difference in
prices between the three reflect what
McDonald's can't control. The
independent [music]
franchisee pricing that accounts for
labor costs and other local factors.
[music] But consider the medium through
which each transaction occurred. Two
kiosks and a phone screen. And now
McDonald's's greatest tool for business
optimization comes into focus.
Historically, a common refrain for those
in the no was that McDonald's is a real
estate company. This still holds true.
They own much of the land on which their
franchise locations sit. They count on
rent as a core income stream. But in the
last decade, McDonald's, along with its
large competitors, have increasingly
become a tech companies, too. Turning to
tech allowed McDonald's to focus on a
critical aspect of the company's
shortcomings that all day breakfast had
hinted at. Convenience. Customers wanted
shorter wait times, faster orders, and
ways to order ahead. In short, this
meant screens. In 2019, the restaurant
chain acquired a company called Dynamic
Yield to help further optimize and
personalize the ordering experience
through past user data and trends. It
was the largest acquisition by
McDonald's in 20 years, and it forever
altered the ordering process. Take again
a Big Mac. Now, really, no matter its
price, a Big Mac is either a loss leader
or only deres a tiny turn of profit for
a McDonald's location. If you were to
order one in the past, then whether in
the drive-through line or counter line,
you'd be faced with a whole host of
promotions of new products, drinks, or
all day breakfast items in the form of
physical posters and banners on the
menu. And when you went to order your
simple sandwich, you'd be asked if you'd
like to turn it into a meal, as French
fries, and especially fountain drinks
have far better margins. Perhaps you'd
be tempted to do so because McDonald's,
after all, has years of experience and
tricks in getting you to spend a little
bit more. McDonald's has a long used
meal pricing decoy strategies, for
example, to make the large meal feel so
similarly priced to the medium that you
go ahead and opt for the large. If you
were to leave with just a sandwich,
that'd be a loss for the chain. If you
were to leave with a sandwich, a drink,
and an odd-end add-on, McDonald's would
count that as a win. But now, Dynamic
Yield, the kiosks, the McDonald's app,
and drive-thru have all taken this to
the next level through far smarter, far
more personalized sales tactics.
Digitized, personalized, customized
menus means long gone are the days of
the drive-thru board listing every
possible meal item. Today, if you're
planning on ordering at the counter or
off the digital menu at the drive-thru,
you're only going to see the options the
company wants you to see. At this New
Mexico location, the only listings and
prices are for extra value meals. If
you're planning on just ordering a Big
Mac and not the meal, you're going to
have to ask. And if you want to know the
exact price before committing, you'll
have to ask for that, too. You can still
order anything off the menu, of course,
but a curated menu passively pushes your
order towards what they want to sell.
And this goes both ways, too. The
company actively wants to make a sale,
too. And it's pushing options that it
proves popular. or say if it's a super
hot day, it'll push items like ice cream
and cold drinks that it assumes will be
popular. This curation also keeps things
moving quicker, too, as a massive menu
with every offering slows lines to a
crawl during rush hours. So, to optimize
the convenience factor the company leans
on, it keeps these menus simple. If you
want the full menu, you'll have to turn
to the kiosks or the app, but it's going
to be in exchange for your data, or at
least asking for your data. Your
location and your order habits are
hugely helpful for McDonald's to
optimize for efficiency. So, when you
use a kiosk, it'll ask you to log in to
your McDonald's account. And then it'll
ask again. And once in, you'll just have
to maneuver around the headline items
like the brand new refreshers and the
top ticket items like the Archburger, a
novelty luxury item with fairly good
margins to get to your sandwich of
choice. The app is going to be less
pushy to get you to log in because once
in, you stay logged in and you're
incentivized to stay through the
accumulation of points and the varying
personal promotions, whether it's a free
item on your birthday or a boilerplate
limited time free medium fry with any
order to hopefully get you in the door.
Such deals create loyalty both ways
while also allowing McDonald's to better
suggest and service items to a customer
based on their past orders. And it
provides user data that then goes on to
inform strategy and pricing companywide.
If, for example, you're consistently
ordering Big Macs when they're $6.10,
then when the price goes up to $649, you
no longer order the sandwich, or worse
yet, you no longer spend at McDonald's.
That's extremely valuable information
for the company to have, and ultimately
information that the company will act
on. While altering the quality of the
product or the products itself presents
a massive undertaking for a chain so
big, screens and big data allow
McDonald's to better alter and fine-tune
prices and offerings to best match what
the customer is willing to pay. Where
In-N-Out optimizes through what it
controls in the physical world, the big
chains optimize through the digital. In
the wake of the $18 Big Mac meal going
viral, concerns over McDonald's's
pricing strategy were voiced in an
earnings call. The company was losing
its important lowerincome customer and
the perceived value of the company's
products in relation to price was
declining. The answer came in the form
of a major value push. First, the $5
meal deal launched in mid 2024. Then,
the McVal menu the year following. Both
span breakfast and lunch items. Both
have marked a pivot in sales and broadly
have proved to work. And yet, if you
were to go to this McDonald's location
in Darian, Connecticut, a Big Mac meal
would still run you nearly $18. And
that's because the word perceived in
perceived value is doing a ton of work.
McDonald's is not in the business of
quality food or cheap food so much as
it's in the business of convenient food
at a stomachable price. That's why the
company developed the app. It's why it
revamped drive-through menus to get
average ticket times down. It needs to
provide a product at [music] pace. More
accurately, it needs to provide products
at pace. It needs to be a place where
you can grab lunch, a coffee drink, and
a bag of ice all at the same time. But a
customer will only act on such
convenience so long as they believe
they're not getting ripped off for a
fairly unspectacular product. So,
McDonald's pours over the data, tinkers
with prices, alters its value menu
offerings over and over to find the
precise price point that the customer
will tolerate. Recently, the company
launched its own line of refreshers and
they're pushing the product hard. Now,
these products simply by being drinks
have high returns, but they also create
incentive in the customer to alter
habits. Rather than going to Starbucks,
one could just hop on the McDonald's app
and order one of these along with a food
item that Starbucks can't match. At
$3.69 to $4.69, these drinks aren't
cheap, but they're comparatively
cheaper. They're cheaper than the
options at Dutch Bros, Starbucks, and
Sonic. They're just cheap enough, the
company hopes, for the customer to think
they're getting decent value for their
money and benefiting from the
convenience of being able to grab food
in the same stop that they'll change up
their typical afternoon refresher
routine and instead bring their business
over to the Golden Arches. The tech
pivot is broader than McDonald's. Taco
Bell, owned by the publicly traded Yum
Brand, has turned to a bifurcated menu
with extreme value items and high dollar
bundle items pushed through the app.
Practically every fast and fast casual
restaurant from Jimmy John's to Panera
Bread have mobile apps and digital
loyalty programs. Wendy's found itself
in hot water when it launched a digital
menu system that could potentially alter
prices of products midday. Customers
called it surge pricing and the outcry
started a larger conversation over an
accusation that no restaurant wants to
be associated with dynamic pricing. Of
course, none in the industry want to be
associated with dynamic pricing given
how much distrust the label engenders.
But the technology exists, the data, and
the data processing exists. And already
and just about every big chain, though
it doesn't happen over the course of the
day, the prices of products do change,
and the value menus shift around every
few months. It may seem too far of a
reach now, but pricing structures that
shift by the hour and by the customer
would fit the larger optimization and
efficiency pushes that fast food has
leaned [music] into the last decade.
Customers have come to stomach rising
costs. So perhaps if slowly and quietly
implemented, they'll come to embrace
dynamic ones, too.
There's an interesting problem with how
information spreads online today. Modern
media ecosystems are incredibly
efficient at amplifying stories, but not
necessarily at helping people understand
them. Important news events quickly
fragment into thousands of headlines,
reactions, and interpretations that all
emphasize different incentives, angles,
and narratives. So, when news broke
during the production of this video that
the head of the Food and Drug
Administration had resigned, I wanted a
clear way to understand not just the
story itself, but how the story was
being framed. And that's why I turned to
our sponsor, Ground News. Ground News is
an app and website that gathers news
from over 50,000 sources worldwide in
one place so you can get the full
picture of every story by comparing
coverage across outlets, getting insight
into a source's bias, how factual they
are, and who owns them. When looking
into this resignation at the FDA on
ground news, I can see that over 350
sources covered the story. If I scroll
down, I can see every article on this
story and compare in real time how the
story is being framed across different
outlets. And just looking at these
headlines, you can already see just how
differently the story is framed from
either side of the political spectrum.
This headline from what Ground News
identifies as a right-leaning source
frames Marty Machi at odds with the
current administration, while this
headline from a left-leaning source
frames Machi as Trump's FDA chief before
then highlighting the new appointment's
alignment with the president.
Effectively, both sources then are
framing the same person and the same
story in a fairly different light when
it comes to Mach's standing in
relationship to the president, signaling
to me to look into this more before just
echoing either side's framing.
Additionally, another feature I love is
ground news's blind spot feed, which
surfaces stories that are
disproportionately reported by either
side of the political spectrum. These
are stories that you may be missing and
could be buried for a reason. I find I
don't always have the time or energy to
deep dive into every news story when my
job is basically deep diving and
understanding broader news stories like
fast food prices. So, it's super helpful
to see the talking points of each side
to understand where there's agreement
while also seeing where the disconnects
are. And honestly, as someone that tries
not to mindlessly repeat biased talking
points, Ground News is an awesome way to
check my own biases and make sure I'm
not falling for overly simplistic or
unfair characterizations of the news
that tend to pop up too often these
days. They've even been endorsed by the
Nobel Peace Center for their positive
impact on media literacy. If you'd like
to clean up your news diet and speak
with more confidence on subjects because
you see how all sides are covering it, I
partner with Ground News to get you 40%
off the same unlimited access Vantage
subscription I use if you subscribe
through my link ground. Wendover.
They're completely subscriberfunded, so
there's no corporate influence deciding
what you see, and you'll be supporting
the channel while you're at it. So,
thank you.